Measure 15 (2009) - ATCM XXXII - CEP XII, Baltimore

Landing of Persons from Passenger Vessels in the Antarctic Treaty Area

The Representatives,

Noting the increasing trend in tourist activities in the Treaty area and the possible impacts of such activities on the Antarctic environment, including its wildlife, and on the conduct of scientific research;
Conscious of their responsibilities to ensure that tourism is conducted in a safe and environmentally responsible manner consistent with the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty; 
Acknowledging the tourism industry’s collaboration in efforts to ensure that its activities are sustainable and compatible with the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty;
Aware of hazards confronting passenger vessels operating in the Antarctic Treaty area and desiring to promote the safety of life at sea; 
Wishing to minimize the likelihood of marine oil spills due to incidents involving large tourist vessels in Antarctica; 
Recalling Resolution 4 (2007);
Recalling the existence of resolutions which set site-specific recommendations;

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 4 of Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty:
That:

1. Parties shall require their operators organizing tourist or other non-governmental activities in the Antarctic Treaty area, for which advance notification is required in accordance with Article VII(5) of the Antarctic Treaty, 
a. to refrain from making any landings in Antarctica from vessels carrying more than 500 passengers unless a lower number is otherwise specified in applicable ATCM measures; and
b. in the case of vessels carrying 500 or fewer passengers,  
i. to coordinate with each other with the objective  that not more than one tourist vessel is at a landing site at any one time;
ii. to restrict the number of passengers on shore at any one time to 100 or fewer, unless a lower number is otherwise specified in applicable ATCM Measures and to maintain a 1:20 guide-to-passenger ratio, unless a more restrictive ratio is otherwise specified in applicable ATCM  measures.

2. nothing in this Measure shall derogate from the rights and obligations of any Party with respect to environmental impact assessments and restrictions on the activities of their nationals in accordance with Article 8 and other relevant provisions of the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty.

3. this Measure, including the specific restrictions in paragraph 1 above, shall be subject to further discussion in future ATCMs to take account of possible changes in circumstance, including with respect to specific sites in Antarctica.