Measure 9 (2016) - ATCM XXXIX - CEP XIX, Santiago

Measure 9 (2016)
Revised List of Antarctic Historic Sites and Monuments: Incorporation of a historic wooden pole to Historic Site and Monument No 60 (Corvette Uruguay Cairn), in Seymour Island (Marambio), Antarctic Peninsula
The Representatives,

Recalling the requirements of Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty to maintain a list of current Historic Sites and Monuments (“HSM”), and that such sites shall not be damaged, removed or destroyed;
Recalling 
·	Recommendation XVII-3 (1992), which designated HSM 60 (Corvette Uruguay Cairn);
·	Measure 19 (2015), which revised and updated the List of HSM;
Desiring to modify the description of HSM 60;

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with Paragraph 2 of Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty:
That: 
1.	the description of Historic Site and Monument No 60 (Corvette Uruguay Cairn) be modified in order to read as follows:

“Wooden pole and cairn (I), and wooden plaque and cairn (II), both located at Penguins Bay, southern coast of Seymour Island (Marambio), James Ross Archipelago. The wooden pole and a cairn (I) were installed in 1902 during the Swedish South Polar Expedition led by Dr. Otto Nordenskjöld. This cairn used to have attached a 4 m high wooden pole - nowadays only 44 cm high -, guy-lines and a flag, and was installed to signal the location of a well stocked deposit, composed of few wooden boxes containing food supplies, notes and letters saved inside bottles. The deposit was to be used in case the Swedish South Polar Expedition was forced to retreat on its way to the south. 
The wooden plaque (II) was placed on 10 November 1903 by the crew of a rescue mission of the Argentinean Corvette Uruguay in the site where they met the members of the Swedish expedition led by Dr Otto Nordenskjöld. The text of the wooden plaque reads as follows:
“10.XI.1903 Uruguay (Argentine Navy) in its journey to give assistance to the Swedish Antarctic expedition.” 
In January 1990, a rock cairn (II) was erected by Argentina in memory of this event in the place where the plaque is located.”
Location:
(I): 64º 17' 47.2" S, 56º 41' 30.7" W
(II): 64 º 16' S, 56º 39' W
Original proposing Parties: Argentina and Sweden
Parties undertaking management: Argentina and Sweden

2.	the revised and updated List of Historic Sites and Monuments be annexed to this Measure.