Measure 19 (2015) - ATCM XXXVIII - CEP XVIII, Sofia

Revised List of Antarctic Historic Sites and Monuments: Lame Dog Hut at the Bulgarian base St. Kliment Ohridski, Livingston Island and Oversnow heavy tractor “Kharkovchanka” that was used in Antarctica from 1959 to 2010

The Representatives,

Recalling the requirements of Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty to maintain a list of current Historic Sites and Monuments, and that such Sites and Monuments shall not be damaged, removed or destroyed;
Recalling Measure 3 (2003), which revised and updated the List of Historic Sites and Monuments, as subsequently amended;
Desiring to add two further Historic Sites and Monuments to the List of Historic Sites and Monuments;

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty:
That:
1.	the following be added to the List of Historic Sites and Monuments:

“No 91: Lame Dog Hut at the Bulgarian base St. Kliment Ohridski, Livingston Island.

The Lame Dog Hut was erected in April 1988, and had been the main building of St. Kliment Ohridski base until 1998. It is presently the oldest preserved building on Livingston Island, used as radio shack and post office, and hosting a museum exhibition of associated artefacts from the early Bulgarian science and logistic operations in Antarctica.”
Location: 62° 38' 29" S, 60 ° 21' 53" W
Original proposing Party: Bulgaria
Party undertaking management: Bulgaria

“No 92: Oversnow heavy tractor “Kharkovchanka” that was used in Antarctica from 1959 to 2010.

The oversnow heavy tractor “Kharkovchanka” was designed and produced at the Malyshev Transport Machine-Building Plant in Kharkov specially for organizing inland sledge-tractor traverses in Antarctica. This was the first non-serial transport vehicle of the Soviet machine-building produced exclusively for operations in Antarctica. This tractor was not used outside Antarctica. Thus, the STT “Kharkovchanka” is a unique historical sample of engineering-technical developments made for exploration of Antarctica.”
Location: 69°22′41,0″ S, 76°22′59,1″ E
Original proposing Party: the Russian Federation
Party undertaking management: the Russian Federation

2.	 the revised and updated List of Historic Sites and Monuments be annexed to this Measure.