Measure 12 (2019) - ATCM XLII - CEP XXII, Prague

Revised List of Antarctic Historic Sites and Monuments: the Wreck of Sir Ernest Shackleton’s vessel Endurance and C.A. Larsen Multiexpedition cairn

The Representatives,

Recalling the requirements of Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty to maintain a list of current Historic Sites and Monuments (“HSM”) and that such sites shall not be damaged, removed or destroyed;

Recalling:
·	Measure 9 (2016), which revised and updated the List of HSM, and subsequent Measures which have added further HSM to the List of HSM;
·	Resolution 2 (2018), which recommended non-mandatory Guidelines for assessment and management of Heritage in Antarctica;

Recommend to their Governments the following Measure for approval in accordance with paragraph 2 of Article 8 of Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty:

1.	the following be added to the List of Historic Sites and Monuments:

“Endurance, Wreck of the vessel owned and used by Sir Ernest Shackleton during his 1914-15 Trans-Antarctic Expedition.

Wreck of the vessel Endurance, including all artefacts contained within or formerly contained within the ship, which may be lying on the seabed in or near the wreck within a 150m radius. This includes all fixtures and fittings associated with the ship, including ship’s wheel, bell, etc. The designation also includes all items of personal possessions left on the ship by the ship’s company at the time of its sinking.”

Location: The exact location of the wreck is unknown as the ship floated in the pack ice for some distance. 

Location records made by Frank Worsley, Shackleton’s skipper and master navigator, give precise coordinates of the location of sinking of the ship but these have not been verified since 1915. We know the wreck is somewhere on the seabed in the Weddell Sea. It is proposed to designate the wreck and all artefacts contained within or formerly contained within the ship, which may be lying on the seabed in or near the wreck.

Original proposing Party: United Kingdom

Party undertaking management: United Kingdom

“C.A. Larsen Multiexpedition cairn.

The site consists of a rock cairn installed in 1892 by Norwegian Capt. Carl Anton Larsen during the first land-exploration of the area around the current location of Argentina's Marambio Station, where the first Antarctic fossil discoveries were made. The cairn used to have an attached wooden pole (2m high and 5cm diameter) of which nothing remains.”

Location: 64°14’13.06"S - 56°35’7.50"W, northeast of the Argentine Station Marambio, Antarctic Peninsula.

Original proposing Parties: Argentina/Norway/Sweden/United Kingdom.

Parties undertaking management: Argentina/Norway/Sweden/United Kingdom; and

2.	the revised and updated List of Historic Sites and Monuments be annexed to this Measure.