Recommendation XIV-9 (ATCM XIV - Rio de Janeiro, 1987)

AIR SAFETY IN ANTARCTICA

The Representatives, 

Recalling Recommendation I-X; 

Recognizing the importance of safe air operations in the Antarctic and:
 (i)  that there is a wide range of problems in air operations which are becoming more important and urgent with increasing activity;
 (ii) that the principal body of knowledge and experience of Antarctic air operations, and its current problems, lies with the operators of national  Antarctic programmes. 

Recommend to their Governments that: 

1.  Arrangements be made for a meeting of experts in accordance with Recommendation IV-24, to be held well in advance of the Fifteenth Consultative Meeting, at a time and place to be decided through diplomatic channels, and that the host Government for the XVth Consultative Meeting should initiate the necessary consultations.  Delegations from Consultative Parties to the meeting should include experts with direct experience in Antarctic operations.  In the course of preparing for the meeting, consideration shall be given to the invitation of ICAO and other experts to attend the meeting in accordance with paragraph 1 of Recommendation IV-24 (e.g. WMO, ITU); 

2.  The terms of reference for the meeting shall be to provide for:
 (i)  avoidance of inter-operator air-incidents;
 (ii)  mutual assistance in the course of Antarctic operations, including medical evacuations; 
 (iii) co-ordinated measures to improve search and rescue procedures. 

3.  In the fulfillment of these terms of reference, the meeting shall have regard to: 
 (i) existing systems for safe air operations;
 (ii) means of mutually co-ordinating air traffic movements in Antarctica; 
 (iii) means of ensuring adequate communications between operators originating air traffic movements, between aircraft and stations in the vicinity of their operations and between aircraft, including consideration of the possible advantages of satellite communications and adoption of predetermined radio frequencies; 
 (iv) means of rapidly initiating search and rescue operations, including the advantages of using common dedicated calling frequencies and of co-ordinating subsequent operations;  
 (v) how best to ensure that all operators in the Antarctic are aware of air-operational safety requirements and search and rescue procedures; 
 (vi) air operations from ships. 

4.  In order to facilitate the work of the Meeting they provide relevant information to the host government, preferably 3 months in advance of the meeting, for circulation to other Consultative Parties.  An indicative list of such information is set out in the Annex to this recommendation. 

5.  The report of the meeting be circulated to all Consultative Parties and be referred for consideration at the XVth Consultative Meeting in accordance with Paragraphs 3 and 4 of Recommendation IV-24.